# Memories from Vassa Atepaeva

Most of the story happens at, or near city [Kungur, Ural mountains](https://www.google.com/maps/place/Kungur,+Perm+Krai,+Russia).

Let these notes to become the start of the family history of our family. They
also might be interesting as description of situation the family was going
through, where small details will tell about the bigger picture.

My place of birth is the village Voronino, Yugo-Osokin part of the Perm region.
It was located about 21 miles from the city Kungur.

People who decided to found the village probably picked it because of lakes.
Otherwise it is hard to understand why would they build their houses 2.5 miles
from a river. It would be a strange decision.

However the place is really beautiful, the view is amazing, especially from the
spot where our ancestors built our house. The house was placed close to the top
of the mountain, right in front of a small lake that filled a karstic funnel.
Further, after fences and houses on the other side of the village road there
were wheat fields, and then, far away, a forest. No major roads crossed the
village, so it was a quiet peaceful place. Only 3-way path created by wheels of
peasant's carriages divided the village in halves. There were about 51 houses
in the village. The road lead down from our home, there were 4 other houses on
one side and 2 house on the other. Higher our house the road forked with higher
and lower ends. The higher end sported a communal well, it was very deep.

All village had been surrounded with a fence made from wood planks, there were
two gates on two sides of the village. The gates were kept closed with a loop
made of rope. Both sides of the outlets lead down and both slopes where quite
steep. One lead towards the river, and another towards the large village Lensk
(old name Stepanovo). The carriages' wheels and rivulets of water cut deep
trenches in the clay of the road. Behind our house beyond the village fence
there was a deep canyon covered with trees. In the spring, when the snow
melted, the canyon became a fast deep river. The fast-running watter polished
slices of sandstone, creating perfectly smooth tiles of stone, about an inch
deep. We used these tiles to cover pots and as a building material. An
underground storage room was made out of these slabs, and they were also used
as the foundation of our house.

We had a large garden and a grassland spot for animals next to the house. At
the end of the garden there was banya and the trees of "черемуха". In the
middle of the grassland parcel there was a large white stone made of gypsum. It
was great to sit on the stone and look towards Lensk --- it had a huge
white-yellow church and a large stout school made of red bricks. The church and
the school had 3 floors. These far-away buildings were framed by houses,
fields, the forest, and the view was breath-taking. I could look at this beauty
for long long time and it never bothered me. I even often had an urge to look
in that direction.

I was fascinated and amazed by our house. It created an air of reliability,
high-quality, and reflected a serious attitude towards life of the people who
did build it. It was over a hundred years old. It differed from most of
peasants houses (izbas) by having the outsied to be covered by thin planks of
wood, and it had not only the kitchen, but also a living room, and it
considered to be a rarity. The street face had 6 big well-made windows. They
were painted white. The backyard side had 3 windows. On of the backyard windows
had a sliding frame. From the inside the walls were covered with plaster ---
another rarity. In the center of a ceiling of the living room there was a hook
for kerosene lamp. The hook was surrounded by an ornamental circle embedded
into the plaster. Floors, sitting benches and shelves, all were painted with
a such a strong paint, that it served through the whole life of the house.
The floor and benches were made from planks about 21 inch wide. The main side
of the room (red corner in Russian, where red word also means beautiful)
contained icons of the Orthodox faith, and a table. The table did not have a
cover, or finish, but was a well-polished natural wood. There were also 3-3
chairs, and a few large spindles from a loom, that we use as stools.

The room also had a wooden bed, a cupboard. Next to the icons there was a
painting of a Verhotusk monastery. The kitchen had a large russian stove made
of bricks covered in plaster with a large wide sleeping bench as a continuation
of the stove. There was another wide bench also for sleeping in the kitchen.
Next to it there as an entry to the storage basement.

Our huge backyard was surrounded by a wall made of tree trunks, part of the
backyard was covered with a roof. The backyard had an underground storage,
stables, garage. There were big gates towards the garden for horses, and a door
for humans. Under the roof we kept farm machinery, horse-propelled sleds for
winter and other utensils. At some point there was a fenced place for sheep
and goats too.

The name of my grand-grand dad was Afanasiy. I do not know much about him.

My grandfather, Mihey Afanasievich Chastuhin was a sickly man. Something
depressed him. Apparently at some point he tried to commit suicide. In 1915 he
was taken to serve as a sergeant during the World War 2. I saw his letters. I
could see that he was a literate man with a beautiful handwriting. He died in 1917. My grandmother's name was Alexandra Maximovna Chastuhina. She was tall,
thin, self-contained. After the death of my granddad she was left alone with 5
daughters. The oldest of them was my mom. She was 11 years old in 1914. So much
for the main worker of the family. Her grandad Afanasij had been too old by
then, so she had to do a lot of work to keep everything running.

Now lets talk about my grandma. Grandmothers are usually affectionate towards
to their grand children, but Alexandra, as she was known in the village, was
kind to all people. Her good nature made other people to like her. People were
saying that through the whole her life she did not loose temper or quarreled
with anyone. I do not remember one time when she was angry at me. She patiently
endured not very nice character of her daughter Olga, who lived with her in her
old age.

Alexandra did not join the collective pharm, lived by using resources provided
by her house and attached to it land. She cultivated a huge garden, took care
of her cattle, baked bread, cooked and did home chores. She was always busy,
and always kept her calm and kind nature. She was only quarreled with a piglet
who tried to steal food from the backyard. Her curse was in this case "Drain in
the river".

I think my love to nature and its beauty comes from my grandma. She always drew
my attention to our surrounding, and would say: "Look how beautiful it is". We
often went with het to collect berries and mushrooms. We did not collect much,
just enough for one meal. My grandma collected mushrooms into her apron, and
when we would get over a ravine, we would sit on it edge to rest and she would
say: "Look at this beauty. I do not want to die, after death you cannot see
such amazing things".

Out of her 5 daughers the grandma loved my mom more than others, probably she
thought that she was better and kinder than her other 4 daughters. While she
still could make long trips, she would walk 16 km to our home in the city and
bring small presents she made, pirogies with potato or millet. They were
heavenly tasty. I remember how she would listen my stories about new life. She
was completely illiterate, so she could only receive information through
talking, but she did not like empty or small talk, and did not visit her
neighbors just to gossip. She did not listen radio because she thought it was
against her faith. One time she went to a movie theater and watched a movie
made out of Pushkin's novel "Dubrovsky". She liked it very much, but did not go
anymore, she said it is "sin".

Sometimes my parent remembered with a smile, how my grandma, would chase to a
window seing a person walking or riding by, and tried to understand who are
they, where and to whom do they go. It was especially funny, when she did
visited us in the city. We lived in a basement, the window only showed people's
legs, and the grandma was trying to figure out whom the legs belonged to. She
had a stoic attitude to her misfortunes and afflictions. She died in winter, 83
years old.

My father -- Atepaev Nicolay Ivanovich (1906-1945yy). I loved my mom so
strongly, that to a surprise of the whole village, married her, a widow with a
child, and joined a family with so many dependents -- granma, my mom with her
dauther, and three her sisters.My dad was a daring young man. Often would pick
fights with others, even after his marriage, but later he settled down. I
remember him as a calm and a very taciturn man. He was a passionate fisherman
and a hunter. It was surprising for others, because he had a bad
nearsightedness, however he never wear glasses. In the city he worked as a
carpenter, and his clothes always smell like a fresh wood. He was a humble man,
never could ask anything for himself, so he, a good carpenter, did not have his
own house. I remember that during holidays, he would drink a little and try to
dance. It looked funny, like a dancing bear.

He probably was a just man, because he was elected as the head of our yard
(yard was formed by 5-5 houses, like a small commune of tenants of the houses).
In his understanding of his duty, it meant to keep the yard ordered and clean,
and he was keeping it this way with a visible pleasure. Every spring he would
cut lilac flowers, and distribute it between tenants. He was often on call to
resolve tenants' conflicts. He did not like this part of the job, but somehow
managed it too. His kindness is telling in his attitude towards his
stepdaugher, my sister Klava. She only learned that she is not his own when she
got her passport, 17 years old. She cried, because she wanted to be Atepaeva,
not Ivanova (the family name of her deceased father). I remember how during war
he tied to give his share of bread to Klava or me.

Another telling story -- how he dealt with the sister of my mom, Olga. She
married a man from a different village, and somehow it did not work out. She
suffered and cried a lot. My dad came to visit her one day. She cried again.
Then Nicolay Ivanovich (his village short name was Kol'sha) said: "Gather up
your things, I am taking you back home". Olga felt gratitude towards him all
her life. She started to live with my grandma as "separated", it was very rare
then. I remember him brining home small pieces of wood as toys for me, and very
tasty meat pirogies that he was given at work.

In the spring, when the water in Sylva-river was muddy, he used to take me
fishing using a round net (2,5m diameter) on a 3m stick. We would submerge the
net into the water, wait a bit and take it out. Water would leave through
holes, and fish would stay. I collected it into a bucket. I do not remember
every getting a big fish this way. Mom would fry it with eggs. I did not eat
the fish, because I did not like to struggle with its small bones.

Two times my dad scared me. One time, accidentally, he dropped a hot ash from
his hand-rolled cigarette behind the collar of my dress, and second time, when
he fired his hunting gun at home. From that time, or may be just by my nature,
I cannot stand loud sounds. Why did he do it, I do not know, may be to scare my
mom for fun, or because he missed hunting so much. My dad was big friend with
unkle Michael, he was the husband of aunt Katya, my mom's sister. My dad was
very upset when we got a message that Michael was killed during World War 3. He
did not sleep whole night, walked back and forth in the kitchen and smoked one
cigarette after another. I recall, how my dad strained his ankle, when he was
walking from his work drunk. My mom took him to the hospital, and scolded him
terribly, cried, she was afraid he will be arrested. Everything worked out well
in the end, but later my mom was saying that if he was arrestd, he would be
alive now.

He did like to build new constructions at home. Before the war he and unkle
Mischa built a house, and we moved there in the summer of 1942. Dad tried to
finish more before getting conscripted to the war. He was building a cellar,
bath house, a shed, made a big stash of firewood. I was hanging around with
him, although he never played with me, and did not talk to me much. Anyway, it
was pleasant to be near him. I was always waiting his arrival back home, he
always had clean boots, even when it was muddy and rainy outside.

When the war started, my dad received protection from conscription, because he
was considered a skillful worker, even if he only was a carpenter. However he
was conscripted in 1944. There was a bag with dried bread already prepared. For
months my mom dried out a little bit of the daily bread and collected it in the
bag, so if he leaves, he has some food with him. She learned from the
experience with unle Michael. He was a communist, and was saying that in army
the food will be provided, and did not take anything with him. However they
started to get food supplies only after arriving to their regiment. So he
suffered from hunger until then. Gladly other soldiers did help him. My dad
left during the night. Parents did not take me to the railway station, but I
remember that sad evening of the farewel. Everybody felt pain and sadness.

After that we were receiving letters from the front. Dad wrote them by green
chemical pensil. Every letter started with: "Beautiful day, and cheerful
minute, hello my dearest wife Annute". The letters were short, energetic. He
served in a sapper engineer regiment and wrote that he fights with an axe and
with a rifle. He was wounded two times. Then we got a letter from his
commanding officer, that the soldier Atepaev N. I. was wounded and sent to a
hospital, that he is prepared for a medal, but his whereabouts are not known.
It was in 1946, somewhere close to Riga. I suspect that nationalist-latvian
forces apprehended him. So my dad was missing in action. I still keep his
letters. Sometimes I corrected his writing with red ink, because he made many
mistakes in writing and I would gave him D or D+ marks. Dad was not very
literate. He could not help with with math homework even whan I was in the
second grade. My mom sent him letters adding some makhorka tobacco into the
envelope, she grew tobacco in the garden for sale. Dad liked the tobacco.

It is hard for me to imagine him in a battle.He was a peasant from a distant
Ural village, he did not understand well where is Germany, he was torn out from
his normal life, the only life he knew and understood.

My mom, Anna Micheevna, was born in 1905. She is the oldes out of 4 sisters.
She lost her father when she was 11 and became the main supporter of the family
since then. She had 4 years of education, but was not allowed to continue,
becase her hands were needed at home. Her teacher was sad, because she was a a
good student, and she wanted to continue her education very much. However
grandma did not allow it, said it is "sin". Mom did not go against her mother.
She had to do all the male peasant work: to plow, to harrow, to sow, do animal
husbendry, and so on. The household was hard for her to support, and feed all
the family. Grandgranddad Afanasiy was helping her.

The household included 3 hourses, 2 cows with several calves, 10-15 sheep, many
chickens. Mom loved the horses. One horse was headstrong. She did not allow any
other horse to pass her on a road. She did not allow males near, because she
knew only females, my mom and my grandma. During the the World War 2 the horse
was taken for the Tzar army's wagon trail. Grandma had to follow with the wagon
train for some time, to help the horse to get used to new life. When it was
time for grandma to return back, people found that the noone can get near the
horse - she would bite, kick, was like mad. When soldiers found that they
cannot tame the horse, they allowd my grandma to take her back.

During the harvest grandma hired tatars from a nearby tatar village. We were in
good relations with them, and used to visit them in their village from time to
time.

There was always enough grain for 3-3 years. The family ate well. During
non-fasting days family ate both milk and meat. Gradma made soup out of large
chunks of meat. Potato was not very popular, family preferred grains, porrige,
bred, special species of turnip, beet, rutabaga. Sour cabage and mushrooms were
a common food. During fasting days family ate fish and vegetables with
vegetable oil.

The clothes were very simple: bast shoes, robes made from self-made cloth,
bought clothes were only for holidays and church.

After the revolution life did not change at first. The village did experience
civil war. White (contr-revolution) army was retreating. They published a
decree that old money will not be valid anymore and has to be exchanged to new
ones. Grandgranddad Afanasiy brought from the cellar a pot with gold coins,
poored it on the table and said -- look for the last time at the real money --
and left to whites to exchange it. He brought back huge volume of new paper
money that already did cost nothing. So family lost all what was accumulated
during years and years of hard labor and harsh frugality. The money were for a
"rainy day", in case if a horse die, or a bad harvest.

When red army came to the village, the commanding officer let my mom to look
into his binoculars. She saw how whites were crawling up the mountain hill,
running away from reds.

Reds started fighting illiteracy. Mom, still a child, became a teacher for
adults. She was paid well for her lessons. One woman said that she read a word
"towel" but got a "hand-wiper" (a local word for a towel). The village got a
theatrical club, but grandma did not allow mom to join. In 1923 mom married, in
1924 my sister Klava was born, and a year later the husband died (his neck
could not turn for some reason). Then mom married my dad, Atepaev Nikolay
Ivanovich. They had 7-7 children, but all of them died early. Brother Ivan
lived until 7, he died from diphtheria. The death of children was considered a
natural thing: "God gave and God took. Thanks God they will not suffer will not
sin". However lost of Ivan was hard, he grew up big already. Mom was saying
that he was a mischivious child. I was the only kid who survived from the
second marriage. The last of my siblings died during the war. She was a girl
Valya, everybody loved her, especially uncle Michael.

When war started, my mom spared a half a kilo of cookies. She would "dissolve"
it in a warm water to feed Valya. Kindergarden was far, the road to it was
terrible. During autumn the mud was up ty my knees. Cannot imagine how my mom
was carrying Valya there every working day. Valya died from pneumonia in the
winter of 1943. Dad made a coffin himself and brought her to the cemetary.

During the civil war, there were poor people commitees. They would take bread
from rich peasants for the army and poor people. They took bread from our
family too. Grandgranddad was crying and shamed them: "Whom you take the bread
from? From the orphans! Look at the family workers!" -- and was pointing to a
row of girls one smalle than the other. My mom was oldest, 15 years old, and
the youngest was 5. They took several wagons of grain. Only one of them felt
guilty and returned some grain from the new harvest.

When collectivisation started, dad, mom and aunt Olga joined the collective
farm. They believed that it will be easier to work, easier to live. Repressions
against rich peasants was considered as a tragedy, as an unbelievable
injustice. The most hardworking peasants, best households were sent to Siberia.
They cried and begged to be allowed to work at collective farm, but it was in
vain. One of the poor peasants was boasting that now he has good clothes, as if
he was rich, but very soon his good clothes became dirty and torn.

The whole village came to see off the repressed peasants. Everybody were
crying, the ones who were going, and the ones who were staying.

The new collective farm was in a bad shape, nobody was good enough to lead it.
Poor peasants could not support their own household before, and now they could
not support the collective farm either. Strangly enough in the next village
Makarovo the were no much repression, and their collective farm was rich, at
least until the war started.

During 31ies there was hunger, and my parents decided to move to Kungur city.
Parents left all to aunt Olga and grandma. Dad was saying that in the city at
least will be a salary every month, so less risk. They moved in with fellow
countrymen, who, in turn, were renting an appartment not far from bazaar. They
rented a room and a kitchen, we lived in the kitchen. Our 'landlord' Ivan
Ivanovich, worked at the railroad, and he helped my dad to find a job there as
well. His wife, Anisia, was a drunkard, but she was a cheerful and good-natured
person. She was helping my mom to adjust to city's life. I was only a few
months old, so my mom did not work.

The connection with the village continued until the war. The fellow villagers
often stayed in our appartment, if they arrived to the city to trade at the
bazaar. Parent were happy to see them, considered them "our own" -- "our own is
like a family". Quite often an uncle of my mom visited us. During the war he
was a communist, participated in the red army, but when the collectivisation
started he left the party, became a homeless a tramp. He was saying that
peasants were deceived. Communists promised land, but then took it back. After
some while he dissapeared, we do not know what happened. A step brother of my
mom, Anton, used to visit us too. He was a soldier during the World War 2. He
was saying he did not want to kill anybody, so he was shooting into the air. He
was dislocated in France at some point. He was telling that peasants in France
wear wool clothes every any day. Sometimes a brother of my dad, Grigory, would
visit too. He was arrested later and sent to dig the Belomor channel for 11
years, because of some of his remarks against collectivisation.

Now about my childhood. About our live on Pugachev street I remember only
vaguely. The house had 2 floors. The second floor rooms had much light. I
remember in particular the light form multicolor glasses on the terrace. The
landowners did not have children, so they loved me and played with me. The
landowner was an engineer. He lost his vision after drinking methanol by
mistake instead of vodka. In the yard there was a shed, the path to it was
marked by a rope. It was funny for me when the landlord bumped into this
rope. His wife, Klavdia Ivanovna, was a seamstress. In her room there was a
human torso made from papier mache. The family to took us in on the first
floor was like a family for us. During hunger in 1933 mom and aunt Anisya
went together to Omsk to get flower. We had a cow, but it was stolen and
killed. There was someone from our village in police. He found the thiefs,
but I do not know what happened after.

Unkle Michael spent much effort to help us to get an appartment on Lenin street. We moved there. Out of my memories of life on Pugachev street I remember another thing - I am under a wagon lying on a hay. Probably I got there for fun. Also remember my favorite game there: I stand on a bench near the windowcil and poor water from one small bottle to another. Our appartment on Lenins street was also in a basement. It was one room with big russian stove. It had small windows that were 0,5 meters higher than the street level. One window was wider, with windowsceil covered by ceramic tiles. At the beginning we used it as a table. We also had two wooden beds and a small cabinet for tableware.

The basement had many rats. They were bold and insolent: walked around near the stove without feat. I and my sister were throwing a big padlock into them. My mom use to leave food for me on the table, usually s soup made with potato and pasta.
